---
title: Git 102
author: Jon Boulineau
patat:
  wrap: true
  theme:
    code: [onVividBlack, dullYellow]
    orderedList: [dullYellow]
---

# Git 102: Collaboration

## Contents

- Branches
- Development
- QA
- Merge Requests

## Git Workflow: Branches

- **Master (Mars)**: Represents the _released_ version of software.
- **Development (Miranda)**: A moderately volatile branch for aggregating changes in preparation for release.
- **Feature**: Highly volatile branches for active development.
- **Hotfix**: A branch to fix a production issue. A hotfix branch can be merged directly into master, but must also be merged into development.

### Best practices

- Each feature branch should represent the smallest possible _deployable_ code change.
- Separate functionality changes from formatting changes.

## Git Workflow: Development

1. Commit or stash changes to your feature branch
2. Checkout development
3. Pull development
4. Checkout feature branch
5. Merge development into feature branch (resolving conflicts, if any)
6. Pop any stashed changes

``` python
                                 .''.
       .''.             *''*    :_\/_:     . 
      :_\/_:   .    .:.*_\/_*   : /\ :  .'.:.'.
  .''.: /\ : _\(/_  ':'* /\ *  : '..'.  -=:o:=-
 :_\/_:'.:::. /)\*''*  .|.* '.\'/.'_\(/_'.':'.'
 : /\ : :::::  '*_\/_* | |  -= o =- /)\    '  *
  '..'  ':::'   * /\ * |'|  .'/.\'.  '._____
      *        __*..* |  |     :      |.   |' .---"|
       _*   .-'   '-. |  |     .--'|  ||   | _|    |
    .-'|  _.|  |    ||   '-__  |   |  |    ||      |
    |' | |.    |    ||       | |   |  |    ||      |
```

### Best practices

- Break changes down into the smallest possible unit of work. Commit locally at that level.
- Each commit should contain only functional code.
- Backup your work using something other than GitLab

## Git Workflow: QA

1. Ensure all hotfix branches are merged to dev.
2. Understand which features will be going to the next CAB
   1. Pull the identified branches and development.
   2. If there are multiple features that **must** be deployed together ...
      1. Create a new branch from development.
      2. Merge all feature branches that will be deployed into this new branch.
      3. Test that branch.
      4. Delete the branch.
   3. If only one ...
      1. Merge development into the feature branch.
      2. Test the feature branch.

## Git Workflow: Merge Requests (MRs)

1. Commit changes to your feature branch.
2. Pull development and merge into your feature branch.
3. Push your branch to GitLab.
4. Create the merge request.(DEMO)

### Best practices

- Squash commits for MRs to development.
- **Don't** squash on MRs to master
- Use extremely descriptive MR titles
- Include the ticket numbers in the MR title
