---
title: Git 101
author: Jon Boulineau
patat:
  wrap: true
  images:
    backend: w3m
---

# Git 101

## Contents

### Part 1

- Why version control?
- Understanding git
- Terms
- Demos

### Part 2

- Git Flow

## Why version control?

Because human beings ...

                 Change our minds

Make mistakes

                 Need to collaborate

## Understanding git

**Git** is ...

- version control software
- not GitLab
- decentralized
- Linux-first

## Terms

**Branch** => A set of files that has its own history.

**Repository** => A complete collection of branches and configuration.

**Master** => The first branch created in a repository.

**Origin** => The repository from which anther repository is cloned.

**Clone** (v) => To make a copy of a repository that is connected to the origin.

**Merge** (v) => To combine the history of two branches.

**Merge Conflict** => A difference between two files that cannot be automatically resolved by git.

**Stash** => To put aside a set of changes that can be recalled later.

**Commit** (v) => To make one or more set of changes a part of of a branch's history.

**Stage** (v) => To mark files as part of the next commit.

**Fetch** => Collect commits from a remote repository into the local repository.

**Pull** => Collects commits from a remote repository into the local repository and merges commits into the active branch.

**Checkout** (v) => Record modifications to a specific branch.

**Push** (v) => To share updates to a branch with a remote repository.

**HEAD** => A symbolic reference to the most recent commit on the active branch.

## Demos

Create and explore a repository

Create a branch

The lifecycle of a change

Merge a branch

Resolve a merge conflict

Stashing changes

Reverting changes
